

Ivett Tóth

Ivett Tóth (born  December ) is a Hungarian figure skater. She is the  CS Ice Challenge bronze medalist, a two-time Santa Claus Cup champion (, ), the  Christmas Cup champion, the  Volvo Open Cup champion, and a five-time Hungarian national (-, ). She has competed in the final segment at eight ISU Championships and placed rd at the  Winter Olympics.

Ivett Tóth was born on  December  in Budapest, Hungary. She attended Babits Mihály Gimnázium in Újpest.

Ivett Tóth's father first brought her to an ice rink in . In , she fractured her ankle and underwent surgery. She competed internationally on the advanced novice level for two seasons beginning in –.

Tóth debuted on the ISU Junior Grand Prix (JGP) series and won the Hungarian national junior title. Selected to represent Hungary at the  World Junior Championships, she qualified for the free skate and finished st overall in Milan, Italy.

Tóth remained a junior in international events but competed on the senior level nationally. She became the Hungarian national champion at the  Four Nationals. At the  World Junior Championships in Sofia, Bulgaria, she was eliminated after placing st in the short program. Tóth was coached by István Simon until the end of the – season. Júlia Gór-Sebestyén became her coach in April .

In November, making her senior international debut, Tóth won the bronze medal at an ISU Challenger Series (CS) competition, the  Ice Challenge in Graz, Austria. Her short program placements at the  European Championships in Stockholm, Sweden (rd);  World Junior Championships in Tallinn, Estonia (th); and  World Championships in Shanghai, China (th) were insufficient to advance to the free skate.

Competing in the  JGP series, Tóth finished th in Linz, Austria, and th in Zagreb, Croatia. After placing th at her CS event, the  Ice Challenge, she took silver at the Santa Claus Cup and won her third consecutive senior national title. 

At the  European Championships in Bratislava, she qualified to the final segment by placing th in the short program with a personal best score. She then placed th in the free skate and th overall. She finished th at the  World Junior Championships in Debrecen, Hungary, after placing th in the short and th in the free. At the  World Championships in Boston, she was eliminated after placing th in the short program.

Tóth finished th at the  European Championships in Ostrava, Czech Republic. Ranked th in the short, she qualified to the final segment at the  World Championships in Helsinki, Finland, and would finish th overall. Due to her result, Hungary qualified a spot in the ladies' singles event at the  Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea.

In May , Júlia Gór-Sebestyén said that the two would no longer work together and Tóth decided to train under Linda van Troyen in Zurich, Switzerland.

Tóth fractured her foot off ice in August . As a result, she withdrew from the  Rostelecom Cup, which would have been her Grand Prix debut. In December, she placed second to Fruzsina Medgyesi at the Hungarian Championships. In January, they both competed at the  European Championships in Moscow, Russia; Tóth was the only one to qualify to the free skate and went on to finish th overall. She was selected as Hungary's Olympic entry on  January .

In February, Tóth competed at the  Winter Olympics in PyeongChang, South Korea. Her performance drew media attention when she appeared on ice to perform to AC/DC's Back in Black and Thunderstruck in a studded leather vest with a picture of Angus Young on the back. She qualified to the free skate and finished rd, both at the Olympics and at the  World Championships, which took place the following month in Milan, Italy.

Tóth decided to train with Zsófia Tokaji-Kulcsár and Zoltán Tóth in Budapest.

"GP: Grand Prix; CS: Challenger Series; JGP: Junior Grand Prix"



