

Buffalo Tiger

William Buffalo Tiger ("Heenehatche"; March ,  – January ,  in Kendall, Florida) was a political leader of the Miccosukee Nation based in the Everglades area of Florida. He served as the first elected tribal chairman from  to , and before that was head of the General Council from  and a chief. His activism led to political organization of the Miccosukee and their gaining federal recognition in  as an independent Native American tribe. They wrote a constitution to govern their people.

In  Buffalo Tiger led a delegation to Cuba and secured formal diplomatic recognition from the government of Fidel Castro of the Miccosukee. In  the US Government recognized the tribe. Under his leadership, the tribe in  was the first to take over responsibility to operate its social and educational programs, as was later encouraged by the Indian Self-Determination Act of . Buffalo Tiger and the tribe have used their sovereignty to preserve their culture and traditions in their homeland.

With historian Harry A. Kersey, he wrote an autobiography, "Buffalo Tiger: A Life in the Everglades" (). From the late s he ran an airboat tour company in the Florida Everglades.

William Buffalo Tiger was born "Heenehatche" in  to Tiger Tiger and his wife in a traditional Miccosukee village in the Florida Everglades. They lived in a "chickee," a house built raised from ground level. As a member of the Miccosukee his first language was Mikasuki, one of the Muskogee languages. He grew up immersed in the traditional customs of the people. In the early th century, the Miccosukee were considered part of the Seminole, and the people maintained their relative isolation from the majority community by living within the Everglades.

When the Tamiami Trail was built through the Everglades in the s and s, it cut through Seminole and Miccosukee land. The road brought tourism to the region, which provided some jobs and a market for Miccosukee crafts, but also encroached on their culture. Many of the Seminole lived closer to European-American settlements and adapted more to the majority culture. In the s, the Seminole began to move into designated Indian reservations, but the Miccosukee stayed outside.

In the s, the Seminole were faced with new challenges; in  the federal government proposed to terminate them as a tribe, which meant a reduction in certain benefits and, more tragically, neglect from the United States to honor their sovereignty.

The majority of Seminole in Florida organized to gather their political power, and in  were federally recognized as the Seminole Tribe of Florida. The process of gaining such recognition had pointed up cultural differences between the groups. Another dividing issue was making claims in the s for land taken by the federal government in the th century; the Seminole of Oklahoma and Florida wanted to gain compensation for lands lost, but the Miccosukee and Traditionals did not want to give up their claim to have the land returned.

At this time, the Seminole and Miccosukee formally separated. Led by Buffalo Tiger, the Miccosukee gained state recognition separately in , and federal recognition in . The Traditionals or Independents did not affiliate with either tribe.

The Miccosukee preserved their more traditional ways and kept some distance from the majority culture. As a young man working as a housepainter, Buffalo Tiger had learned English. He began to represent his tribe in dealings with the European Americans. The modern world encroached on the Miccosukee and the Everglades, areas of which were developed, and he became an energetic and outspoken leader of the community.

Buffalo Tiger was chief of the Miccosukee in ; he was elected as the first tribal chairman after its adoption of a constitution, and served as chairman for decades. To create publicity about the tribe's effort to gain federal recognition, in  Buffalo Tiger requested recognition of the Miccosukee from several nations; only Cuba responded. He, Homer Osceola of the tribal council, and Morton Silver traveled to Cuba in  and met with premier Fidel Castro of the new revolutionary government.

He worked with state and federal officials to implement reforms and to protect the community’s cultural and natural resources. Under Chief Buffalo Tiger's leadership, in May  the Miccosukee signed a contract with the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs to take over operation of the "comprehensive social and educational programs formerly run by agency bureaucrats. He had worked closely with the tribe's attorney, S. Bobo Dean, who represented it in negotiations in Washington, DC. The Miccosukee were the first tribe to take such control, taking advantage of President Richard M. Nixon's  initiative of Indian self-determination prior to passage of legislation in  to support this.

Their several parcels of lands are known collectively as the Miccosukee Indian Reservation. Under a separate lease arrangement with the state water conservation district achieved in , they have access and fishing and hunting rights in , acres of wetlands.

Chief Buffalo Tiger served on the Florida Governor's Council on Indian Affairs, established in  as an advisory body to the state's chief executive. He and the chief of the Seminole served as co-chairs of the group, two-thirds of whose members were appointed by the two federally recognized tribes in the state.

Buffalo Tiger helped bring modernity to his people, including control of their programs, economic development, and improvements to medicine and education. At the same time, Buffalo Tiger supported efforts to preserve the culture; the Miccosukee Indian Village Museum was founded in . He was opposed by some traditionalists because of failure to gain more land under tribal control and finally voted out of office in .

Since the late s, Buffalo Tiger developed a business to take tourists on airboats through the Everglades. He used these occasions to educate people about the total ecology of the area and build support for its preservation, such as a planned airport. He opposed the construction of I- through the Everglades, a major freeway which was completed in . He had developed a tourist business, Buffalo Tiger's Airboat Tour, for the Everglades. Family members took over operation of the business in the st century.

Buffalo Tiger was married three times, each time to a non-Miccosukee woman. He lived in Miami. Among his five children are two sons from his first marriage, both of whom are active as Miccosukee. One has worked as an engineer with General Motors in Detroit, and Steven Tiger has led a rock group, Tiger Tiger, which has released several CDs.



