

The Sacred Taking

"The Sacred Taking" is the eighth episode of the of the anthology television series "American Horror Story", which premiered on December , , on the cable network FX. The episode was written by Ryan Murphy and directed by Alfonso Gomez-Rejon.

In this episode, Fiona (Jessica Lange) must take her life in order to undertake a ritual to find the next Supreme. This episode is rated TV-MA (LV). Angela Bassett, Gabourey Sidibe, Danny Huston, and Patti LuPone guest star as Marie Laveau, Queenie, the Axeman, and Joan Ramsey, respectively.

Madison and Zoe find Queenie under an overpass, torturing a homeless man) with her powers after he threatened her. Queenie tells them that she is now practicing voodoo, after Marie Laveau convinced her that the witches are not true friends. Madison taunts her, and Zoe tells her that the structure of the Coven is changing. Unfazed, Queenie uses a dagger and cuts out the man's still-beating heart. She informs them that the man is a pedophile and Marie needs a dark heart to strengthen Queenie's powers with a spell. Queenie, still holding the beating heart, warns the witches that war is coming and that they're going to lose.

The Axeman asks Fiona to run away with him, but she doesn't want to be a burden to him. However, she wants to stay alive as long as possible, knowing her cancer is rapidly advancing from one of the girls obtaining her Supreme powers. Fiona just needs to figure out which one it is.

Luke's mother chastises him for visiting the girls at the Academy, for they are using the "Devil's magic". She says that he's completely "unclean", makes an enema, and forces him to strip. At the Academy, Nan hears his screams and wants to help him, but Cordelia wants her assistance in the plot against Fiona.

Zoe finds a freaked-out Misty at the door. In a flashback to Misty's cabin, Myrtle, still covered in her healing mud, has woken her about a man outside. Misty hears the cicadas have stopped making noise and flees, right before the man kicks in her cabin door and shoots her bed. At the Academy, Cordelia confirms Misty is a fellow witch needing protection by taking her hand and seeing her burning at the stake and resurrecting herself. Misty asks if her friend can stay and takes them to see a revived and almost-normal Myrtle in the greenhouse. Myrtle notes that resurrection is the most difficult spell of the Seven Wonders to accomplish, and believes Misty is the next Supreme.

The Coven prepares for the Sacred Taking ritual by wearing red robes and black lace veils. Zoe and Madison debate who is the next Supreme. Cordelia tells them being a Supreme isn't a gift but a burden. Misty says she doesn't want to be the Supreme, and Cordelia tells her that no one gets to choose, in the end whoever it is will be. Once Fiona dies, there will be a new Supreme. Cordelia explains the Sacred Taking ritual is invoked to protect the Coven in which a Supreme takes her own life to ensure the safety of the Coven, hastening the next Supreme. Madison points out that Fiona won't kill herself, and Cordelia responds not without a "push."

Fiona's health continues to deteriorate. She violently vomits in her bathroom, then finds Madison dancing around her bed. Madison claims to be the next Supreme by reviving herself and Fiona's punishment will be burning at the stake. She convinces Fiona to avoid that fate and swallow the handful of pills given to her. Madison tells Fiona to stop making herself and everybody else suffer. Fiona starts packing immediately after Madison leaves. Myrtle appears, telling her that Madison resurrected her. Fiona tells her she's not ready, that she's found a true love to take care of her. Myrtle casts an illusion of Fiona wasting away in a hospital bed, with the Axeman complaining about the smells and of how long Fiona is taking to die. Myrtle tells Fiona that she will die the same way she lived her life, alone and disappointed by everyone.

Out in the hallway, the girls disagree over who will be the next Supreme. When no one responds to Nan when she asks if they think she could be the Supreme, she storms out, saying you guys "suck balls" and goes across the street to Luke's house. Waiting in his car outside, Hank sees her. She finds Luke inside, bound and gagged in the closet.

In her room, Fiona prepares herself for death, with Myrtle's help. She asks Myrtle to look after Cordelia, claiming it her most terrible failure and "one that will torment her into eternity", takes a handful of pills and lays down on the bed. She asks Myrtle to hang her portrait in the spot she chose in the foyer and to not hang her in the basement with that "disgraced Russian witch". Myrtle takes some of Fiona's jewelry, then walks out. Fiona wakes up to a voice calling to her. Spalding tells her he wants to give her something to purge the pills, explaining why he could now speak and that he was murdered. She resists taking the ipecac, believing she was doing the right thing for the Coven for once. He implies she is taking the coward's way out. He then tells her she was duped by the others – Madison isn't dead, but isn't the next Supreme. Misty resurrected her. Fiona takes the ipecac, vomits the pills, and vows that she will avenge both Spalding's death and her own.

At Marie Laveau's, Queenie serves a caged Delphine LaLaurie a "jumpin' jack with cheese." Delphine asks Queenie what she did to deserve her betrayal, begging Queenie for release. Marie interrupts them and Queenie leaves. Delphine scoffs at Marie's taunts, pointing out she cannot die. Marie produces a large sword, mocking Delphine, saying the mistake you make is from a lack of imagination. Delphine responds by saying that she's not afraid of her and that she wouldn't give her that satisfaction as Marie hacks off Delphine's hand, warning that "we've only just begun."

Nan and Luke are prevented from leaving his house by his mother. He tells her that she cannot stop them. She threatens him, while a rifle laser appears on her and she is shot twice. Luke is also hit in the head, protecting Nan from the gunfire.

At the Academy, the witches wait for Fiona to die, but are surprised when she appears asking about the "swamp witch". Misty is across the street, as paramedics are tending to Luke. Fiona joins her and compels an officer to tell her what happened. He tells them Luke is wounded and the mother is dead. Fiona then challenges Misty to bring Joan Ramsey back. Outside, Cordelia finds a bullet, and her Second Sight shows its trajectory. She knows it was meant for witches. Inside, Misty revives Joan and collapses.

Meanwhile, Kyle has been secreted away in Zoe's room and she tells him they are under attack. She fears for his safety the most, and he professes his love for her, as Madison listens from the hallway and begins sobbing.

The next morning, Cordelia is concerned for Fiona's wrath, telling Fiona that she will not beg for forgiveness. Instead, Fiona admires the Coven's resilience and believes there is hope for its future. Cordelia then shows Fiona the silver bullet she found – a witch hunter is in New Orleans. Cordelia tells Fiona that she was glad Fiona was still with them when she found the bullet, saying the Coven needs their Supreme, now more than ever. With no servants to be found, Fiona answers the front doorbell, only to find a cardboard box on the porch. She scans it with magic, takes it inside and opens it. Inside is Delphine LaLaurie's head staring back at her, whispering for help.

Rotten Tomatoes reports an % approval rating, based on  reviews. The critical consensus reads, "The polished writing and creative direction turn "The Sacred Taking" into a more-than watchable transitional episode, speckled with touching, human moments." Emily VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" gave the episode a B rating, saying, ""The Sacred Taking" is "just" good enough to make me realize how much this season has been lacking, in ways both major and minor." Matt Fowler from IGN gave the episode a ./ rating, writing, """ is still wickedly watchable, but it does run in circles. Even more so than ""."

"The Sacred Taking" received a . – ratings share and was watched by . million viewers in its original American broadcast, winning the night for cable.



