

Wargaming (company)

Wargaming Group Limited (also known as Wargaming.net) is a Belarusian video game company headquartered in Nicosia, Cyprus. The group operates across more than  offices globally and development studios, the largest of which is located in Minsk, where the company originated from. Initially focused on turn-based strategy and real-time strategy games, Wargaming switched to developing free-to-play online action games in , including the military-themed team-based game "World of Tanks".

Wargaming was founded by Victor Kislyi in Minsk on  August , intending the company as a developer of strategy video games. The company's first project was "DBA Online"—the digital version of a miniature tabletop rule set "De Bellis Antiquitatis"—launched in . Wargaming started working on its first full-scale commercial project—the sci-fi turn-based strategy game "Massive Assault", in March . Over the course of five years, the company shipped five projects within the "Massive Assault" franchise.

On  November , Wargaming acquired the Minsk-based developer Arise. In December , the company released its first real-time strategy "Operation Bagration". On  April , Wargaming started working on real-time strategy game "Order of War". It was published by Square Enix on  September . On  August , the company released its first online title, "World of Tanks". On  April , "World of Tanks" was released in North America and Europe.

In , Wargaming relocated its headquarters from Minsk to Nicosia, Cyprus. Since  August , these headquarters are located in the Wargaming HQ building, formerly known as the President building, located near the Presidential Palace in Nicosia. European operations headquarters, known as Wargaming Europe, were established in Paris, France, in July . On  August , the company created a direct presence in North America by opening an office in San Francisco. At E , Wargaming announced the follow-up to "World of Tanks", the flight combat online action game "World of Warplanes". At Gamescom , the company unveiled the third part of its military saga—the naval action online game "World of Warships". In October , Wargaming announced the online collectible card MMO game "World of Tanks: Generals". Throughout , Wargaming joined strategic partnerships with Persha Studia, Lesta Studio and DAVA Consulting, with each operating separate projects under Wargaming.

On  February , the Android version of "World of Tanks Assistant", the mobile application for "World of Tanks", went live in Europe and North America. In May , Wargaming entered the Korean games market by opening a subsidiary office in Seoul. Wargaming embarked on a rebranding initiative and announced the Wargaming.net service, which will unite its games and services into a single battle universe in June . On  August , Wargaming acquired Australian company BigWorld Technology which brought development of the middleware for its MMO projects in-house. In an annual report for the Cyprus Stock Exchange (CSE) in , Wargaming's revenue was declared to be . million Euro, with a net profit of . million Euro. Wargaming's shares were delisted from the CSE in , and it remains a privately held company to date.

Wargaming moved into the console market by acquiring Day  Studios on  January . Renamed Wargaming Chicago-Baltimore, the studios are currently developing "" (February ), Xbox One (July ) and PlayStation  (January ). On  February , Wargaming announced its own eSports league, the Wargaming.net League. The company acquired Gas Powered Games on  February . On  March , Wargaming announced "World of Tanks Blitz", a mobile MMO game centered around tank combat available for smartphones and tablets. The game was released on iOS in June . As of , "World of Tanks Blitz" is available on iOS, Android, Windows  and Mac OS X. Wargaming branched into the Japanese games market by opening an office in Tokyo on  May . On  July , the company bought "Total Annihilation" and "Master of Orion" intellectual properties from the Atari bankruptcy proceedings.

In July , Wargaming launched WG Labs as a division that would act as a third-party publisher to outside developers. The creation of the division was primarily driven by Wargaming's partnership with independent studio NGD Studios and their game, "Master of Orion". In October, the company also rebranded DropForge, a Bellevue, Washington-based mobile game studio founded in  by David Bluhm, as WG Cells. WG Cells was shut down in August .

Wargaming's WG Labs division released a reimagining of "Master of Orion" in August . The game was developed by the Argentine NGD Studios. In November  Wargaming, SEGA and Creative Assembly announced a new strategic partnership that will see Total War: ARENA published worldwide. As of , Wargaming owns a significant share of the Hellenic Bank (Daniel S. Loeb's Third Point Group is the other major shareholder of the Cyprus-based Bank) and has shown an interest in purchasing land property assets in Cyprus for its use and investment purposes. Wargaming has become the largest taxpayer within Cyprus.

In May , Wargaming found itself amidst controversy when it was claimed that one of its employees had threatened to file a Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) claim against YouTube gaming content creator SirFoch over his scathing review of a "World of Tanks" premium tank. In , Wargaming started a mobile games division called Wargaming Mobile. In February , Wargaming America closed its Emeryville offices, cutting  jobs.



Since , Wargaming runs its own esports organisation, the Wargaming.net League, which serves as a platform for "World of Tanks" pro-gamers, with each tournament year broken down into several seasons featuring a series of online and offline events that culminate in a massive online tournament, Grand Finals.

Wargaming is involved in a number of projects to preserve military cultural heritage, including:

As part of its simulation initiatives, Wargaming is exploring virtual and augmented reality technologies. In early , the company worked with Google to record and portray a  battle in ° for the Google Cardboard mobile HMD. This was followed by a series of panoramic tours of WWII tanks, "Virtually Inside the Tanks Retrieved", filmed in co-operation with Google and The Tank Museum in Bovington. Available via the Littlstar VR cinema network, the series currently includes the T--, the M Sherman "Fury" from the Brad Pitt movie of the same name, the Type , Leopard , and the Chieftain. Each video also offers a tour with Wargaming military specialists Richard Cutland and Nicolas Moran.

To honour Victory Day, Wargaming released the "War Knows No Nation" video. The video rekindles the memories of three veteran World War II tankers, blending live action panorama footage with CG scenes for the very first time. In spring , Wargaming worked with the National Museum of the Royal Navy, Portsmouth Historic Dockyard and honoured the anniversary of the Battle of Jutland with an augmented reality app: "HMS Caroline" AR Experience. To congratulate Russians on Navy Day, Wargaming created a PortHub augmented reality mobile app that allowed users take snapshots with warships. As part of the  Years of Tanks celebration, Wargaming presented the "Virtually inside the First Tanks °" video that featured a walkthrough of Bovington's collection of early tanks, enhanced by "World of Tanks" in-game scenes and the free Tank  mobile app. Another in its range of ° videos, "Virtual Inside the Warships", features "HMS Cavalier" amongst others.




