

Canadian Pacific 

Canadian Pacific  is a -- "Pacific" type steam locomotive built in June  by the Montreal Locomotive Works for the Canadian Pacific Railway. As a member of the G- Class, the  was in use in fast passenger service until being retired in  after having its duties taken over by diesel locomotives. The locomotive was placed in storage until  when it was purchased for display in the Steamtown U.S.A. collection in Bellows Falls, Vermont. In , the locomotive was restored to operating condition for the purpose of pulling excursion trains for Steamtown until it was taken out of service in . Currently, the  is stored awaiting a future overhaul.

 was built in  for the Canadian Pacific Railway for fast express passenger trains. While little is known about its career on Canadian Pacific, it is known that it was stationed in Winnipeg, Manitoba for a good portion of its working life. Upon its retirement from active service in , it was placed into storage. In , seafood magnate and steam locomotive enthusiast F. Nelson Blount purchased the locomotive and moved it to Bellows Falls, Vermont, with the rest of his Steamtown, U.S.A. collection.

In ,  was restored to operating condition and joined Steamtown's operating fleet, painted in the Canadian Pacific gray-blue and Tuscan red livery (which it never wore in regular service).  was moved with the rest of the Steamtown collection to Scranton, PA, arriving on  January . The  was fired up four days later for the "Grand Entrance Ceremony" on  February .  was fired up once more on  September  for the first Steamtown excursion in Scranton which ran on the former Delaware, Lackawanna and Western mainline between Scranton and Elmhurst, PA.

In ,  was painted in the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad's "Pocono Mountain Route" livery. It remained this way until after the National Park Service took over Steamtown in  when it was repainted into the livery it wore in active service with Canadian Pacific.

 was present at the grand opening of Steamtown National Historic Site along with Baldwin Locomotive Works  and Canadian National  and ran several excursions on the former Lackawanna main line.  then settled down and would often pull Steamtown's excursions in tandem with  until  when problems with its trailing truck, dry pipe and tires were found. Between  and ,  only ran the "Scranton Limited" yard shuttle trains. New tires were installed in , which allowed  to pull a few of the longer excursions to East Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania and the Delaware Water Gap.

After the end of the  operating season,  was used only sparingly as its flue-time was running short.  last ran during Steamtown's  Lackawanna Railfest. After which,  was placed into storage in the Steamtown Roundhouse where it is viewable to the public.  currently awaits FRA-mandated repairs before it can operate again. According to Steamtown, they would restore , after finishing the restoration project on Boston and Maine .


