

Pikeview, Colorado

Pikeview (Pike View, Pike's View) is a neighborhood of Colorado Springs, annexed to the city as the "Pike View Addition" on August , . In  there was a Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad station in Pikeview, and miners had begun digging a shaft for the Pikeview Coal Mine. Pikeview also had a quarry beginning  for the mining of limestone for concrete. Coal mining ended in , but the Pikeview Quarry continues to operate. Quarry operations, though, have created a gash or scar in the landscape and efforts have been made since the late s to reclaim the hillside landscape. The Greg Francis Bighorn Sheep Habitat in what had been Queens Canyon Quarry was founded in  in recognition of the individuals and organizations that have worked to create a nature hillside habitat.

The town of Pikeview, which began as a Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad station by . It was named for the scenic view of Pikes Peak away. The Denver and Rio Grande Railroad station was situated at a confluence on Monument Creek, north of the Roswell junction and south from the  Husted station.

Two Pike View Reservoirs, which were part of the extension of Colorado Springs Irrigation System to Monument Creek, were constructed in .

A school house was built in Pikeview north of the station by . The Pikes View Coal Mine was the same distance from the station. The post office was south of the station. By , the station included a depot, a pond, and a road intersection of the north-south Monument Valley Highway (now Interstate ) with a road west to Rampart Range.

A shaft was sunk in late  and the main coal was discovered at what would be the Pikeview Mine, also called the Carlton Mine, on January , . The Pikeview Mine is a slope mine, which uses the room-and-pillar method to extract coal.

In the early s, there was a mass exodus of people from Southern Europe. Many immigrants to the United States headed for the mining towns of Colorado—like Pikeview, Papeton, and Franceville—directly after having entered the country. Many of the mine workers were Greek, and when the men went on strike in  a man named Louis Tikas who worked for the United Mine Workers went to the mine to work undercover and take affidavits of workers regarding working conditions. The workers may have been prompted to return to work and await a coordinated union walkout because most of the Pikeview miners returned to work after a few days at the same pay rate.

In a letter dated August , , Tikas summarized that there were  Greek men working in the Southern Fields, which included Pikeview, Las Animas County and Huerfano County mines. There had been  men killed on the job and many more that had been injured since January , . Affidavits taken by a Greek-speaking individual was important, otherwise information about the immigrants was often overlooked by government and company reports. They also paid very high prices for goods from the company stores, had seen the scales that weighed coal significantly under-report the mined coal per coal car, did not receive good medical treatment, and were dissuaded from seeing attorneys while in the hospital.

Tikas reported of the Greek mine workers of Southern Colorado,

The Pikes Peak Consolidated Fuel Company, a subsidiary of Golden Cycle Mining and Reduction Company, was located in Pikeview in . Harvey McGarry of Colorado Springs was the president and Robert O'Neil of Pikeview was the superintendent. In , Pikeview's economy was nearly entirely based upon mining.

The mine was owned by Golden Cycle Mining when it closed operations July , . At that time, there were  miners who lived in company housing on the site who were affected. Management personnel were transferred to other Golden Cycle operations.

Pikeview Quarry has operated since  and Queens Canyon Quarry has been mined for limestone since . The extraction of the stone by Castle Concrete created a noticeable gash or scar in the Queens Canyon Quarry, north of Garden of the Gods, which closed in .

There is some mining that occurs at Pikeview Quarry, but that effort is being moved to another side of the hill. As the shift occurs, the terrain will cut back the quarry into the mountain, a plan devised by Greg Francis who worked for Castle Concrete for  years and spent  of those years working on reclamation of the quarried landscape. He started with Pikeview Quarry, about one mile north of Queen's Quarry. After failed reclamation attempts, he devised the plan to cut back the hill so that it can be "resculpted" into a terrain that will better support planted trees and landscaping. "Time and moisture will blend the quarry into the surrounding hillsides," states Colorado Mountain Reclamation Foundation (formed ) project manager, Wanda Reaves. By fall of , , trees had been planted. An additional  trees were to be planted on the Pikeview Quarry in . Castle Concrete intended to mine Pikeview Quarry until , so the reclamation efforts were intended to continue throughout that timeframe.

On August , , the hillside was renamed Greg Francis Bighorn Sheep Habitat in honor of Francis, who died October . A statue of a bighorn sheep stands on Greg Francis Bighorn Sheep Habitat in recognition of the herd of  bighorns (in ) and Greg Francis, hundreds of volunteers, and efforts by Castle Concrete to reintroduce Rocky Mountain juniper trees, native grasses, and small piñon to the hills.





