

 United Nations Security Council election

The  United Nations Security Council election was held on  October  during the Twenty-fifth session of the United Nations General Assembly, held at United Nations Headquarters in New York City. The General Assembly elected Argentina, Belgium, Italy, Japan, and Somalia, as the five new non-permanent members of the UN Security Council for two-year mandates commencing on  January .

The Security Council has  seats, filled by five permanent members and ten non-permanent members. Each year, half of the non-permanent members are elected for two-year terms. A sitting member may not immediately run for re-election.

In accordance with the rules whereby the ten non-permanent UNSC seats rotate among the various regional blocs into which UN member states traditionally divide themselves for voting and representation purposes, the five available seats are allocated as follows:


To be elected, a candidate must receive a two-thirds majority of those present and voting. If the vote is inconclusive after the first round, three rounds of restricted voting shall take place, followed by three rounds of unrestricted voting, and so on, until a result has been obtained. In restricted voting, only official candidates may be voted on, while in unrestricted voting, any member of the given regional group, with the exception of current Council members, may be voted on.

The election was managed by then-President of the United Nations General Assembly Edvard Hambro of Norway. The United Nations had  member states at this time, with Fiji being admitted only three days before the election (for a timeline of UN membership, see Enlargement of the United Nations). There were no nomination prior to the vote. Delegates were to write the names of the five member states they wished elected on the ballot papers. Voting was conducted on a single ballot. Ballots containing more states from a certain region than seats allocated to that region were invalidated.




