

 Atlantic hurricane season

The  Atlantic hurricane season was an Atlantic hurricane season. The season officially started on June , , and it ended on November , . This time period is when tropical cyclones usually form in the Atlantic Ocean.

Tropical Depression One started on June  in the southern Gulf of Mexico. Tropical Depression One moved around for a little bit before it died on June . The depression caused rain affects in Mexico. 

Tropical Depression Two started on June  near Cape Verde. Two was forecast to become a tropical storm, but two didn't. Tropical Depression Two died on June , before it could come near any land. 

Hurricane Alberto was a long lived hurricane, it lasted for nearly three weeks. Its track was the second longest for an Atlantic hurricane. Alberto moved almost , miles. Hurricane Alberto started on August  and died on August . The remains of Alberto were last seen about  miles east of Jan Mayen.

On August , a very small depression started. The depression headed for Florida, but moved back almost the same direction. Four died on August . Tropical Depression Four only caused rain in Florida.
Beryl was a tropical storm that started on August . Later, on August  it made landfall in Mexico, while winds were at  miles per hour. Tropical Storm Beryl quickly died over Mexico. The storm killed one person and caused $, in damage.

Chris was a weak tropical storm that started on August . Tropical Storm Chris was a tropical storm for not very long before wind shear destroyed it on August .

Hurricane Debby started on August . During its life it moved mostly west. On August , Debby made three landfalls in: Barbuda, St. Barthelemy, and Virgin Gorda. The hurricane moved just a bit north of Dominican Republic, causing light damage. At first, Debby was forecast to strike Florida, possibly as a category  hurricane. Debby instead stayed south and died to the south of Cuba. The hurricane killed one person and caused $, in damage. 

Tropical Storm Ernesto was like Tropical Storm Chris earlier in the season. It was short lived, it was a weak tropical storm, and it died because of wind shear. Ernesto started on September  and died on September . 

Tropical Depression Nine was a tropical depression that made landfall in Texas. It did not get much of a change to become a tropical storm before landfall. It died on September , shortly after landfall.

Hurricane Florence started on September  and died on September , near Newfoundland. Florence caused high waves in North Carolina, which killed  people.

Hurricane Gordon started just east of the Yucatan Peninsula, as a tropical depression. It was landfall in the Yucatan Peninsula not long after. Gordon moved into the Gulf of Mexico and became a tropical storm. On September  it became a hurricane. But it weakened to a tropical storm before it made landfall on Cedar Key, Florida. Gordon weakened fast and died on September . Gordon killed  people and caused $. million in damage.

On September , a tropical depression with the number "Twelve" started. It died not long after starting. The remains moved west and became a depression again on September . The depression became a tropical storm and was named "Helene". On September , Helene made landfall in Fort Walton Beach, Florida. Tropical Storm Helene weakened fast over land. It later on got back to the Atlantic Ocean before it died on September . As a result of Helene,  people were killed and there was $ million in damage.

Hurricane Isaac was a powerful hurricane that peaked as a category  For all of its life it stay far from land. But, it caused high waves sunk a boat and drowned one of the passengers off of Long Island in New York. 

Joyce started as a depression on September . Hurricane Joyce peaked as a category  hurricane. It weakened back to a depression before it passed between some of the Windward Islands. Joyce died on October  in the southeast Caribbean Sea.

Hurricane Keith was the strongest hurricane of the  Atlantic hurricane season. Keith struck Belize and Mexico before it died on October . Keith killed  people and left $ million in damage. Most of this damage happened in Belize. It was because it struck Belize while stronger than when it struck Mexico.

Tropical Storm Leslie started as a subtropical depression over Central Florida. Leslie did got very strong before it died on October . The low pressure that made Leslie start, caused almost $ billion in damage.

Michael started on October  as a subtropical depression, and it moved slow at first. It moved faster and got stronger at the same time. It made landfall in Newfoundland as a category  hurricane. Michael died very shortly later. No damage or deaths reported.
Nadine started as Tropical Depression Eight on October , it was located  miles from land at the time and it would never get closer than that. Nadine became a tropical storm and died on October .

This Subtropical Storm was the final storm in . It started on October  as a subtropical storm. It headed near Nova Scotia and Nefoundland, but it died on October , before reaching those places. 
The names below is the full list of storm names for use in . This list if exactly the same as the one in , because no names were retired in . 
In spring , the name Keith was retired. It was replaced by Kirk in .


