

Stop Stansted Expansion

Stop Stansted Expansion (SSE) is a pressure group established in . It was originally a working group of the North West Essex and East Herts Preservation Association, in response to the Government's consultation on expanding UK airports and, particularly, expansion plans for Stansted Airport defined in . It has around , members and registered online supporters and its campaign director is "Carol Barbone".

The group's objective is to "restrict the development of Stansted Airport within tight limits that are truly sustainable and, in this way, to protect the quality of life of its supporters over wide areas of Essex, Hertfordshire and Suffolk, to preserve local heritage and to protect the natural environment."

The organisation has already delayed the time-frame for second runway plans for Stansted by four years (from  to ).

If the plans went ahead, there would be climate change effects. The predicted annual equivalent carbon dioxide emissions ( they are around  million tonnes a year at present) are  million tonnes annually with full use of the existing runway and up to  million tonnes a year with a second runway.

On the th October , the UK Government approved an increase in Stansted's permitted passenger throughput from  million passengers per annum (mppa) to mppa using the existing runway following a Public Enquiry. Stop Stansted Expansion (SSE) has described this decision as "entirely predictable, cynical and unjustified". 
After this announcement, on  November, Stop Stansted Expansion lodged an Appeal with the High Court.

A key part of the campaign against the second runway is to stimulate letters of objection to the application. Uttlesford District Council has received over nine thousand representations to date with many more expected to follow.

Passenger traffic at Stansted is falling sharply. The airport handled % fewer passenger in  than in the previous year (.m passengers last year compared to .m passengers in ). SSE therefore says that "increasing passenger numbers from mppa to mppa will not make any difference in the short term. Indeed, with the recent dramatic deterioration in the economic situation – both domestically and internationally – the UK is entering uncharted territory with regard to the future demand for air travel." 
BAA's Plans to get through the Public Inquiry as fast as possible for their application for a second Stansted runway (in six months) have been condemned by Stop Stansted Expansion (SSE). It began  April .
The news that the Inspector appointed by the Government is looking to conduct the Inquiry at a "breakneck" pace was revealed in a note from the Planning Inspectorate issued ahead of the Pre Inquiry Meeting held on  November , when the Inquiry programme and procedures were discussed at a public session. A further programming meeting is to be held on  January .

"Running parallel sessions examining different subjects in different Inquiry rooms at the same time would severely compromise the community's ability to participate fully in the Inquiry" SSE says. "It would be impossible to conduct a fair and proper examination of BAA's plans by effectively excluding community representation by SSE and parish councils who are planning to play a leading role, said "Carol Barbone", campaign director." 




