

 Atlantic hurricane season

The  Atlantic hurricane season was an Atlantic hurricane season. It began on June ,  and ended on November , . However, Subtropical Storm One formed on May , a day before June . The  Atlantic hurricane season had only seven named storms.

 was also not very damaging or deadly, with only  deaths and $ million in damage. Hurricane Danny was the only hurricane of  that had caused any major affects to land.

A subtropical storm formed from a low pressure area on June . It was not known at the time that it was a subtropical storm. The subtropical storm died on June . 

Ana started on June  as a tropical depression off the coast of South Carolina. It became a tropical storm the next day. By July , Tropical Storm Ana weakened back to a depression and it died on July .

Bill was a short lived hurricane that started on July . It quickly became a tropical storm on that same day. On July  it had become a hurricane, and Hurricane Bill died on July . 

Claudette started on July , while it was a few hundred miles to the south-southeast of North Carolina. It stayed weak and for a few hours it weakened to a tropical depression, but it again got strong and became a tropical storm. Tropical Storm Claudette died on July . The remains were last seen on July  near the Azores.

Danny started in the northern Gulf of Mexico on July , as a tropical depression. It got stronger quickly, as it was a category  hurricane by July . Hurricane Danny made landfall in extreme southeastern Louisiana On July . Danny also made two landfalls as a category  hurricane in the Mobile Bay area on July . It weakened very fast over land, being only a tropical depression on July . Later on, Danny became a tropical storm again on July  and went into the Atlantic Ocean. Danny passed near Nantucket shortly before it died on July . Hurricane Danny killed  people and caused $ million in damage.

Tropical Depression Five started on July . It moved to the northwest and showed some signs that it was dying on July . Tropical Depression Five died on July . 

Hurricane Erika started on September  as Tropical Depression Six. It moved to the north-north west and became a hurricane by the next day. Erika passed near the Virgin Islands on September , while it was a category  hurricane. On September , Hurricane Erika quickly strengthened, it peaked as a category  hurricane on September . Erika started getting weaker on September . It moved mainly to the east and northeast before it died on September  near Azores. Erika killed  people and caused $ million in damage.

Fabian started on October  north of Puerto Rico. Tropical Storm Fabian moved to the north and died on October . Storms before it became Fabian may have caused heavy rain in the Lesser Antilles. 

Tropical Storm Grace was the last storm of . It started on October  near Dominican Republic. Grace made a sharp turn to the northeast and died on October . 
This is a list of names set aside for use in the  Atlantic hurricane season. Names that did not get used in . 

The World Meteorological Organization retired no names used in the  season. All names on this list were used again in  as a result.


